---
layout: trip_post
title: "Mountains to Deserts"
date: Thu 23 Jun 2022 10:40:44 PM EDT
categories: [cross-country]
image: 'canyon_view.jpg'
description: "Second half of cross country ride"
---

> Note: This was an essay written about the second half of my cross country
> trip in a Memoir Writing class during my first year at MIT. Names in the
> story are changed. This is written in a blog format, as the format of the
> essay was supposed to be "creative". This is just how I remember it a few
> years after. See more details in [about]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link about.md %}).

### Blog 1: Boat Launch

![Blog 1]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link assets/img/mtd_blog_9.png %})

Dear Reader,

If you’re reading this, I must have made it back to internet service. For some
reason, because I’m in the Navajo reservation, I don’t get phone service. I’m
at a boat launch by a tiny river, in the middle of a very cold desert. The
other side of the river looks very daunting, with a steep climb into the sky.
I’ve got the spot to myself, and it’s quite peaceful. My tent is set up right
next to the picnic table where I’m sitting and eating, and there is a little
toilet and dumpster on the other side of the launch. I keep trying to remind
myself to eat vegetables, so I’ve got a nice salad from the gas station in
town, though I don’t know how much good it’s doing given the contrast from the
chocolate milk I’ve treated myself to.

Today was my first official day on my own. The two I had been bicycling with
since Virginia dropped me off in Blanding, UT, where I stayed last night. My
hosts were great; they told me which roads to take to get to Mexican Hat, and
boy, were they beautiful. At one point, I think I could see the “Four Corners”,
where Utah meets Colorado, New Mexico, and Arizona, and everything from snowy
mountain tops and forests, to deserts and canyons. The canyons had rocks
colored vivid reds and greens that I never thought could come from something as
dead as rock. On my way into this grand town, boasting a gas station, RV park,
and pizza place, I passed back what must have been its namesake, a natural rock
pile with a wide rock on top, resembling a hat.

It’s weird not having phone service, and not being able to check in with
friends and family before I go to sleep. Fortunately, I have all of my maps set
up offline, so I should still be able to navigate. Tomorrow I’m going to go
through Monument Valley and into Arizona, to Kayenta. It’s only 40 miles away,
so shouldn’t be very hard. I’m a bit worried about the cold, but today wasn’t
too bad. I’ve got two pairs of gloves, good wool socks, and bread bags as an
extra layer, just in case. Speaking of the cold, it’s getting pretty chilly
with the sun setting, so I should head to bed now.

### Blog 2:

![Blog 2]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link assets/img/mtd_blog_7.png %})

Dear Reader,

Well, I made it to Kayenta. I didn’t realize how cold deserts can get at night.
Maybe it wasn’t the smartest idea to camp next to a river. I had to wear all my
warmest clothes inside of my sleeping bag to stay warm. I guess I should have
gotten a colder weather sleeping bag, because it dropped to 10 degrees and my
bag was only rated for 30. I woke very early to the cold, and had to pee, which
was a whole operation. I prepped myself, going over the detailed choreography
of my plan so I wouldn’t waste any time. I slipped out of my tent, peed into
the brush, quickly did twenty jumping jacks, then dove back into my sleeping
bag in my tent. As the sun filled in, the temperature became more bearable, and
I was able to pack up my campsite. My tent is very hard to roll back up with
gloves on, so that was tricky.

Once I packed my bike, as I was hiking back up the path to the road, my tire
blew out. Exactly what I needed! At least the gas station was right there, so I
went inside to warm up before fixing my tire. The gas station cashier looks to
be not more than a few years older than I am, and when she notices me, she
asks, “Are you the cyclist?”. I respond that I am, and she follows, “I think
your mom called.” I’m somewhere between stunned, amazed, and embarrassed. She
wants you to call her back.

My mother is by no means a helicopter parent. In fact, she is quite the
opposite. After all, I am bicycling in the middle of the desert in Arizona, and
just graduated high school a few months ago. But I think I forgot how much she
worries. As she reminded me this morning, she has an amazing ability to call
you no matter where I am. While I want to be able to be independent out here, I
can’t help but enjoy the comfort of having my family keeping track of me.

I rode through Monument Valley today. I wanted to stop and enjoy it, but I was
just too cold. There was a pretty strong head wind while riding, and my hands
and feet were quite frigid. I tried a few configurations of socks, and haven’t
been able to find any successful strategies. I think my cleats are too tight
and thin. Anyway, Monument Valley was cool to see. I did stop at the visitor
center, and I was able to warm up a bit there. I think there’s only a day or
two left of this cold weather, when I’ll be out the back of the cold front.

I’m currently in a Taco Bell. I managed to snag a good spot where I can see my
bike just outside the window. I can’t imagine anyone taking it, but what a
disaster that would be. I still don’t have phone service, and the WiFi at
McDonald’s wasn’t working for me, but Taco Bell’s is great. This is my first
time at a Taco Bell. I’m a bit surprised to see kinds of places like this on a
reservation, but I guess these are the things you learn by traveling. The food
is very cheap, but the portions are tiny for my bloated bicycle touring
metabolism, so I keep having to go up and order more. I think a guy saw me
doing that and brought me half of his meal because he said he ordered too much.
I appreciated it.

I’m starting to get a bit worried about finding housing. I don’t think I can
sleep outside tonight, because it’s too cold. This Taco Bell is open 24/7, so I
could stay here all night if I needed. It’s not a great plan, but I like to
always know the worst case scenario. There is a website called Warm Showers
that I’ve been using this trip, and it matches cycling hosts to bicycle
tourists. I’ve reached out to a host in the area, but haven’t gotten a
response, which happens. When you do find someone, it’s great. The next places
to go to are churches and fire stations. I’ve tried calling a few, but haven’t
gotten any responses. My mother has offered to help, and so hopefully she might
be able to find something.

Update: It turns out my sister knows someone who has a relative who lives in
Kayenta and can host me! Better yet, she has two additional relatives on the
next two stops on my route. She’ll be here with her truck in 20 minutes, so I
should get ready.

### Blog 3: Waiting Out the Cold

Dear Reader,

I decided to stay in Kayenta two nights. It looks like tomorrow will be much
nicer weather. I haven’t gone outside at all today, which is the first time
I’ve spent an entire day inside since starting the trip. I watched a lot of TV,
mostly the weather and news. We just had Navajo Tacos for dinner, and I tried
to help cook dinner as much as I could. The Tacos were delicious. My host,
Buelah, is an older woman who works in the deli at the grocery store. Her
husband used to work for the mine in the area, before it shut down. He told me
that it’s hard for someone like him to find new work. They live with their
mother, who is not very mobile, and two little dogs, who joined me on the couch
for most of the day. It has been very restful. I have a collection of postcards
from the rest of the country, and I’ve written a little thank you message on
one of them to leave on my way out. It’s not a lot, but it’s something.

Tomorrow I’ll be heading out again, and it looks like it should be much warmer,
so I’m excited. It’s still crazy how cold it is here, when in Phoenix, only 300
miles away, it’s 30+ degrees warmer. I guess it’s all about elevation, not
latitude. In just a few days, I’ll drop elevation, and it will be much warmer
from then on out. Tuba City, where one of Buelah’s daughter lives, is 74 miles
away, so I should get some sleep.

### Blog 4: Warm Biking

![Blog 4]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link assets/img/mtd_blog_4.png %})

Dear Reader,

I made it to Tuba City. Today started out chilly, but by the afternoon I was
warm again. I’m glad I made it out of the cold, and the rest of my trip seems
way less daunting now. Tuba City is on the edge of the reservation, so I think
I should get phone service back soon. I thought I’d get it back here, but I had
to go to the library for WiFi, to reach out to my host, Evelyn. She was not
going to be there that night, but she generously let me stay on her couch while
she was gone. I walked to the dollar store and got some microwaveable chicken
pot pie and snacks for the night. Tuba City is a little bigger than Kayenta and
Mexican hat, with a hospital and other amenities, but still not huge. Most
buildings are one story. When I look off into the distance, it looks like I’m
on the moon; the desert looks like it has dark craters everywhere, yet the
horizon is perfectly flat and smooth. There’s not a cloud in the sky, just a
golden-brown hue from the setting sun. When I arrive back at Evelyn’s home,
there is a kitten outside, swatting at the strings dangling from my bicycle,
reminding me of my cat back at home.

Tomorrow is another 75 miles to Flagstaff. It will be a steep climb, but the
weather is good, and I’ll be staying with Sarah, Evelyn’s sister, so I’m not
worried. Flagstaff is a much bigger city, so that should be nice. However, I’ll
be on a larger road for most of the ride. I guess that is the trade-off.

### Blog 5: Leaving the Reservation

![Blog 5]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link assets/img/mtd_blog_10.png %})

Dear Reader,

It’s been two nights since I last wrote. I decided to stay in Flagstaff after
Sarah generously offered to host me another night and take me to the Grand
Canyon.

I must have been on the old Route 66 on the way here, because there were many
references to it on the side of the road. There were also quite a number of
little three wall structures off the road where people were selling goods,
mostly jewelry, from what I could see. Once I got near Flagstaff, I entered the
Coconino National Forest, which was a bit of a surprise. The desert turned to
brush, and then to trees and tree-covered mountains. The trees were not large
ones like you see in other places, but they were not what I was expecting to
see. I guess I had thought Arizona would be a dry, hot desert, all the way
across, but apparently that was wrong.

The Grand Canyon was spectacular. It lives up to it’s name. It’s a very large
canyon. I don’t think I have a nuanced opinion on this, so I’ll leave it at
that.

Tonight, Sarah gave me a necklace, made from little seeds strung together. I
have never worn a necklace before, but I’m flattered by her generosity. The
necklace is not glitzy, like most I’ve seen, and it cannot be smelted down for
a high value. It is simple and natural looking, and has a certain strength to
it. It is like my bicycle, providing far more sentimental value than its
inherent worth. I will wear it for the rest of the trip.

Tomorrow, I will be finally descending elevation, down to Camp Verde, some four
thousand feet lower. It’s a full century (100 miles) away, which is more than
I’ve ridden any day this whole trip. I think I can do it, and I will be finding
a place to camp in Camp Verde, so if I don’t make it all the way there, I’ll
just find a spot off the side of the road. It would be nice to be in a town,
though, because then there will be food, water, and restrooms.

### Blog 6: Fire Station

![Blog 6]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link assets/img/mtd_blog_1.png %})

Dear Reader,

I am in Camp Verde! I made my first century ride of the trip, and my first ever
loaded (with bags) century. The only issue I had was a flat in the beginning of
the day, but the huge final twenty mile descent into town helped tremendously.
When I got here, I first stopped at the fire station, and asked if it was
possible for me to camp on the lawn. The lady at the desk was not sure at
first, but one of the firemen came up and led me to a spot where I could camp.
He was a cyclist too, he said, so that probably helped. It wasn’t a big town,
and it wasn’t a big station, maybe just a couple vehicles. After I got set up
outside, the fireman came back out and asked if I’d like to shower. I, after a
long day of attracting sweat and dust to my skin, was very happy to accept the
offer. He showed me to the shower, and then told me, “I have to head out for a
bit, so if I’m not here when you’re done, just close the door on your way out.”
I can’t believe how trusting he is.

It’s not going to be very cold tonight, and there’s no chance of rain, so I’ve
got my tent out for bugs, but I’ll be able to leave the fly off and gaze at the
stars tonight. I’ve reached out to a Warm Showers host for tomorrow, and he’s
only 40 miles away. There’s a big climb, but 40 miles shouldn’t be very hard at
all. He lives in Prescott, another 10 miles from Prescott Valley, where I am to
meet him at his “tool shop”. I’ll let you know what that is.

### Blog 7: Fish Tacos

![Blog 7]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link assets/img/mtd_blog_2.png %})

Dear Reader,

I neglected to write last night, as I was up very late, chatting with my host.
I’m about to ride out this morning the 70 miles from Prescott to Aguila. My
host, Russ, has already left for work, but must have left this little wireframe
bicycle on my bike on the way out. I’ll have to find a safe spot in my bag for
it. As usual, I have a postcard to write a little thank you note on. I’ve
always thought souvenirs were a waste, but feeling the necklace around my neck
and seeing this little bicycle, my opinion seems to be changing.

Yesterday morning I packed up and had a slow morning with Mexican food for
breakfast. It was a nice treat, compared to the cold can of food I ate for
dinner from the gas station the night before.

I then headed up a steep winding road to a touristy old mining town, Jerome,
that is about halfway up the climb to the top of the pass. It was a grueling
climb, and I even started to miss the cold weather from before. At least cars
could only go 15 mph around the turns, so they would see me pretty easily. The
town of Jerome was small, and built into the side of the cliff, so houses next
to each other looked like they were stacked on top of each other. When I saw a
sign for a candy store, I could not resist, and ordered myself some delicious
chocolates to help me make the rest of the climb. The woman running the store
asked what I was up to, and after I told her, she said she had a kid about my
age, and gave me a discount on my chocolates. I thanked her as I stuffed them
into my frame pack, the zipper bag that fits into the triangle of my bicycle
frame, where I would keep my day snacks.

One thing I love about bicycling, is that even when I’m going 3mph up a climb,
I can look back and be amazed with how far I’ve gone. I can barely see the
places I’ve biked through just an hour before. The road curved back and forth
inside a valley that climbed up to the top of a ridge, providing a pass through
the mountains, and many opportunities to look back at my trail.

As rewarding as climbing is, the real reward is the descent on the other side.
This descent was just steep enough that I didn’t have to pedal, but not too
steep that I had to brake. I felt like I was skiing down the mountain, winding
back and forth, in and out of the cliff. There were many points where I could
stop and admire the view for longer, but I didn’t want to lose my speed, so I
rarely did.

I was to meet Russ in Prescott Valley, where he had his tool shop. I was a
couple hours early, so I biked around the town a bit. I settled down in a nice
park in front of a library. There were many students walking around, and I
thought about how I was one of them so recently, and how glad I was to not be
one of them now. They probably have to do the same thing every day, over and
over again. I know I will be a student again when I start college, but that
feels so far away.

At 5pm, I rolled up to the tool shop to meet Russ. From the outside, the tool
shop looked like a large shed, and there were all sorts of parts and things
lying around outside. Inside, the selection of items was dense, with many bikes
and other parts even hanging from the ceiling. I had never seen any store like
it, and I was quite impressed. Russ reminded me a bit of my dad. He was about
my dad’s age, and shared interests in tools, bicycle mechanics, and bicycling.
The way he biked and the way he acted was similar to my dad, likely because he
is also a cycling father, as I later learned. When Russ was ready to head out,
he took a look at my tires, and asked if I would be fine taking some dirt
trails on the way to his house, ten miles away in the older town of Prescott. I
accepted, and we were off. He was quick, and I later learned that he is the
Mountain Biking coach for the high school, a pretty big sport around here.

It was just getting dark outside as we got to his house. He showed me to a spot
where I could put my bike and a spot on the floor where I could sleep, and went
to the kitchen. I was just inside the glass from the back porch, and all around
me on the walls he had a variety of odd bikes. There was a cargo bike, a tandem
bike, a kids bike, and even a swing bike, which turns both at the handlebars
and at the seat. When I joined him in the kitchen, he asked how I felt about
fish tacos, and I replied I was a big fan, so I helped him put them together.
He leads me out to the back porch to eat, and lights the outdoor wood stove he
has, to give us a little heat and light. We exchanged stories about our lives,
and talked for hours into the night, until we were both thoroughly exhausted. I
don’t know if it was the food or the conversation, but it was the best meal I
have had in a while.

Anyway, I should probably get riding. Tonight, I have found another Warm
Showers host, and they live in a gated pilot community, whatever that is?

### Blog 8: Gated Pilot Community

![Blog 8]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link assets/img/mtd_blog_8.png %})

Dear Reader,

I’m truly in a gated pilot community. There are two of us Warm Showers guests
staying here. Hannah is bicycling the other direction, North East, after she
finished riding down the coast from Oregon. We met at the library in the tiny
town of Aguila, and I learned a bit about what I am to expect in the rest of my
ride. Apparently it’s pretty hot in the California desert. Our hosts came
driving in a pickup truck, a nice old couple, neither of whom has done much
bicycle touring, but somehow found out about Warm Showers and started hosting
cyclists as they rode through.

Hannah and I rode behind their truck to their home. After we passed through a
gate with a code, we were instructed to stay close. We passed a few houses in
what looked to be a grid layout, and the houses were quite big with huge
garages. Could those be hangars? No… The street signs were also odd, large
stone blocks with street names written on them.

All of a sudden a big red light starts blinking in front of us, and we stop.
With a whoosh, a plane swoops down and lands in front of us, crossing the road
were riding on. Finally, I’m able to grasp the reality of what we’re riding
through, and I’m amazed. I later learn that the street signs are made so a
plane wing can safely pass over them so that all of the pilots in this
community are able to access the runway in the middle. I had no idea that such
a place existed.

Our hosts’ home is absolutely spectacular, with a swimming pool and ping pong
tables. They showed me to a guest room in the hangar, where I am now. It is all
plane themed, and has its own little bathroom. It’s quite amazing. Just outside
my door is a single engine plane.

Tomorrow, I will finally be in California! I’m a little confused by my map, but
there is a stretch of i-10 that looks like it allows bikes, and it will help me
avoid a twenty mile detour, turning a 105 mile day to an 85 mile day. I think
I’ll give it a go. In Blythe, CA, I’m supposed to stay at a bait shop, also on
Warm Showers. From there it’s just a few days to the coast. I haven’t really
made any specific plans for when I get there, but I need to work my way North.
I’ll plan that when I get there.

I’m having trouble staying awake, because this bed is just too soft and
comfortable, pulling me to sleep.

### Blog 9: Bait Shop

![Blog 9]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link assets/img/mtd_blog_5.png %})

Dear Reader,

I rode on my first interstate highway today! It was pretty noisy with all of
the cars and trucks flying by, but I was reassured every time I saw a sign that
said bikes were allowed in the shoulder. There was a lot of trash in the
shoulder, and it seemed much dirtier than other roads I’ve been on. Once I
crossed into California, the highway approached an agricultural checkpoint.
There were signs pointing for trucks to go right, and cars to go left. This is
when I realized I wasn’t supposed to be there anymore, and I had gone too far.
I didn’t really know at all what to do, because I definitely couldn’t go back.
I saw an open parking lot on the left side of the gates, so I carefully
“froggered” across the three lanes of traffic, and crossed around the
checkpoint. I then had to get back to the other side. This was much trickier,
as the cars were accelerating out of the gates, so I may have had to stop a few
of them to cross. I’m sure they were a little bit confused, but so was I. As
soon as I could, I exited the highway for the service road.

In Blythe, I traveled through the large grid of fields and irrigation canals to
the corner of one field, where the bait shop is. It looks like a little
convenience store, with a small outdoor bar and picnic table area, and there
are trailers strewn about behind and around it. The owner of the shop is there,
but apparently the previous owner keeps accepting hosts on Warm Showers and not
always telling the new owner. She’s quite nice, anyway, and says I am welcome
to stay in one of the empty trailers, if I’d like, or in a tent outside. The
trailer has a shower, but we can’t figure out how to get the heat on, so it’s a
pretty chilly shower, but well worth it to wash all of the dust and dirt I’ve
collected.

I join the owner at the picnic tables, where a number of the locals all welcome
me very warmly. They offered me beers, and ask me about my trip, where I’m from
and where I’m going. I learn about someone who rolled a tractor over while
farming, and where they were in the extraction process. At one point, one of
the farmers explained to me why inorganic was just as good, if not better, than
organic produce.

When I told the locals about my plan for my next day, they warned me that the
road I’d be traveling on is quite narrow. Given that tomorrow is the start of a
long weekend, I should watch out for the many RV’s and trailers carrying sand
buggies that will be traveling through on that road about noon. They recommend
that I leave as early as I can so I can get off of that road before they come
through. After much conversation and two microwaveable meals, wielding their
advice for tomorrow, I headed into the trailer where I am now. It’s not
glamorous inside the trailer, but it’s protected from the elements.

I’m heading to bed now, and planning to wake up early and start riding at
sunrise tomorrow. Hopefully, I can make it through the tricky portion early.
It’s 90 miles to Brawley, so a long day, regardless.

### Blog 10: Hitchhiking

![Blog 10]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link assets/img/mtd_blog_6.png %})

Dear Reader,

I made it to the coast. Not exactly in the way I expected, but I made it! It’s
been almost two months since I left Virginia, the longest and farthest I’ve
ever been away from home.

I started bright and early in the morning out of Blythe, and made it maybe 40
miles when I got my first flat around 10 AM. It was about 80 degrees, and I had
ridden about 15 miles into the desert on the narrow stretch of road. There was
absolutely nothing around, not even phone service. I fixed the flat on the side
of the road, and got back on the road. Maybe ten minutes later, I got another
flat in that same tire. Looking at my last patch, it looks like the glue wasn’t
able to hold. Maybe it was something about the heat. I redid the patch, making
sure that the glue was ready before putting the patch on, and it seemed to hold
when I inflated it. Five minutes later, another flat, again on my rear tire.
That’s when I knew it was it. I don’t know how I never really noticed how worn
my tire was, but I could see the threads pulling out of it in many spots, and
it didn’t have any tread left anywhere really. My front tire was fine, but my
back tire was where my panniers were so must have been taking most of the load.

Anyways, I am in the California desert. As usual, I examine my worst case
scenario. I have water enough for at least 24 hours, and I can probably walk to
Brawley from here, but it might take a very long time. I could also probably
walk back, which might be a bit quicker. I don’t have any phone service, so I
can’t call a cab. They wouldn’t come out here probably, anyway. As I’m sitting
on the side of the road, figuring out what to do, the frequency of RV’s driving
by starts to increase. Now instead of one very fifteen minutes, they start
coming every five minutes. Soon, there are RV’s every minute or so.

I leaned my bike down, walked up to the side of the road, and stuck my thumb
out. I’ve seen it done before in movies and on TV, and I’ve always heard people
talking about how they used to travel by hitchhiking. Somehow, I always thought
the whole thumb thing was a trope. However, standing there on the side of the
road, there was only one way for me to request a ride from drivers, and that
was to put my thumb in the air every time a vehicle passed by. I did walk to a
more favorable spot along the road, where I felt there was the longest runway
for drivers to see me. For every vehicle that approached, I’d evaluate its
likelihood of letting me in, then, as it passed, I’d drop my thumb and wait for
the next one.

Finally, after about a half an hour, a pickup truck with a small RV extension
in the bed drove by. It had two bikes on the front, so I thought maybe that
might help my chances. However, they passed right by, and I dropped my thumb.
The truck then stopped, swung around, and headed back towards me. They asked me
where I was headed, and I told them the coast. They said they were headed to
San Diego. I stuffed my bike in the RV, and we were off, I was saved!

The couple who picked me up said they had kids who were my age, and they were
from Prescott. The husband was the superintendent of Prescott Public Schools,
in fact, and the wife worked in special education. They were headed to a
conference and, lucky for me, wanted to take the side roads, instead of the
interstate.

In the back seat, I messaged my family to check in, and tried to figure out
where I wanted to go. I really had to go to a bike shop, there was no other
option, and there were none until San Diego. After a bit, I realized that my
cross country ride was ending. The couple dropped me off at a bike shop in San
Diego, and I waved them goodbye. I had wanted to ride all the way to the coast,
but you can’t control everything. It’s not what I expected, but I’m happy with
my journey.
