---
layout: post
title: "Finding my Wild West"
date: Thu 23 Jun 2022 09:42:47 PM EDT
categories: [update, cross-country]
---

> Note: This was an essay written about my cross country trip in a Memoir
> Writing class during my first year at MIT. Names in the story are changed.
> Also, this is just how I remember it a few years after. See more details in
> [about]({% link about.html %}).

The journey begins at a cafe in Davis Square, a few blocks from home, where I
am to meet my traveling companions. Sitting at a table waiting for them to
arrive, wanders. What will these two twenty-four-year-old women be like? Will I
get along with them? Would they be okay riding across the country for two
months with a little eighteen-year-old like myself? I see a friendly-looking
pair walk through the door, looking around, and I know it is them. They seem
like very normal people, fitting right into the upscale coffee shop we’re in. I
don’t drink coffee or go to coffee shops at all, and I wonder if they’ll think
I’m weird.

I wave them over and we introduce ourselves. My mom insisted that I travel with
someone, and I agreed. Although I did some bicycle touring in the past, it was
mostly with guided groups, and even though I apprenticed at a bike shop, I know
there are issues that can arise while traveling where it helps to have another
set of hands. Besides, it would be lonely to ride on my own, and scary too. 

I’ve only heard a little bit about them from the cyclist forum where I found
them, and I learn that they went to school together and have been friends for
years. Jen explains that she’s been working with Hannah on biking longer
distances, and they’ve been taking some trips together on the Cape, where Jen
lives. Jen is already a pretty strong cyclist, but Hannah hasn’t ridden much
before. Hannah’s fit though, and Jen reassures me that she’ll get better. Jen
confesses that she’s a little worried that they’ll slow me down, but I tell her
that I don’t want to go too fast, anyway. I want to enjoy it, and I’d rather do
it at a moderate pace with others than alone. She seems to appreciate this, and
she adds that it’ll be nice to have my mechanic skills with us as we go, in
case anything goes wrong.

Our plan is to leave mid-September. Not many other people leave in the fall,
because it takes two months, so we’ll be crossing the Rocky Mountains in
Colorado in mid or late October. The weather is supposed to stay above freezing
in the places we’re going though, and although I’m not completely convinced,
the average weather charts are reassuring. The plan is to drive down to
Virginia from Boston together, and start biking West to California from there.

![Packing](images/clothes_layed_out.png)

Just a day before leaving Boston, I have all of my clothes and equipment laid
out across the floor. I’d done bike touring trips before, so I had an idea
about how to pack. My phone rings, and it’s Jen. She asks if it is okay if
Hannah’s twin brother comes on the trip as well. I’m a bit confused, but I say
yes, as long as he’s got everything he needs. It will be good to have another
guy around, anyway. 

The day to leave comes, and Jen and Hannah drive to meet me with the rental
car. My mom asks if she can get a picture of all of us before we go, foiling my
intent to seem adult. The other two, however, are happy to oblige. After a
quick goodbye, we’re on our way to Virginia, picking Mike up from the airport
when we arrive. 

On our first morning, we strap up our bikes with our gear. This is the first
time I get to see all of their bikes. Mine is a tough touring bike that my dad
had bought for me the previous summer, specifically for this trip. My gear is
all used, a bit dirty, and slightly mismatched. Jen is in a similar situation,
with a little bit of wear on everything. The twins, on the other hand, have
completely new bikes for this trip. Mike had even bought all of his bags and
clothing with the bike, to the point that his jersey matched the paint job on
his frame.

![Dipping Wheels in the Atlantic](images/wheel_dip_va.jpeg)

We start slow, still getting used to our bikes and biking as a group. I’m much
more adjusted to my bike than the other three, so I have no problem keeping up.
Mike and Hannah are slower, but Jen is pushing them forward and fighting to
keep them going. Jen and Hannah have a plane to catch in San Francisco, and so
we have to average 60-mile days to make it.

In Virginia, it is very hot. As someone often described as a human furnace, I
worried I might entirely melt away from summer heat in the middle of the
country, so I had intentionally set the trip in the fall. There is an unusual
heat wave passing through, however, making me feel cheated by the weather. Not
long after leaving the coast, we embark into the Blue Ridge Mountains. We are
following a route made for bicycle touring, but it seems like it had been
routed directly through the hilliest areas. We climb thousands of feet up steep
slopes, trudging along at barely faster than walking speed, the sun beaming
90-degree heat down on our backs, sweat pouring down our faces for hours at a
time. And then there are the downhills where, for a brief few minutes, we reset
the elevation counter and escape the overwhelming heat. We have to make sure to
keep our mouths closed on the downhills, as it is common to fly through a swarm
of insects, and by the end of the day our arms and legs are often thick with a
layer of sweat and little black specs.

The hills were are tougher on the other three. Pretty early in the trip, Mike
is biking up one such hill and is zigzagging back and forth on the side of the
road, when he takes it too far and bumps his knee into the guide rail. At first
it seems like just an innocent bump, but it starts to act up again as we
continue. Eventually, we have to stop. Mike hitches a ride into town, where he
rents a car to drive along our route for a few days of rest. 

For Hannah, the hills are a constant battle. She often ends up breaking down in
tears, not able to make it biking up the hill, and frustrated at the slow
trudge on foot. She also has pain in her wrist while biking, and every now and
then we stop to give it a rest. Jen tries to help her through her ailments,
though often in a very militant way. She tells Hannah that her pain is all
mental, that she is fighting herself, and that she’s making barriers for
herself that are not real. She should push through the pain and she’ll be fine.
Maybe she is right, but Hannah certainly doesn’t think so. Anyway, I didn’t
want to get involved.

Some days, Hannah takes a rest day in Mike’s rental car, leaving me and Jen on
bikes. On one such day, the two of us are taking a break in a gas station. It
is hot, so I’m treating myself to a chilled bottle of chocolate milk, my
ultimate cycling treat. Jen hops onto the stool next to me, facing the
bar-style window that looks out across the road into the fields. She explains
to me that her father was in the military, and it was the way he raised her
that taught her these strategies of dealing with pain. She didn’t complain, she
would just push through. She was the same way with running and other parts of
her life. She also worked on a fishing boat on the Cape, and you had to be
tough there too. Mike and Hannah didn’t have this kind of childhood, she
explains. They grew up very wealthy, their family living off of their
grandparents’ wealth. You know how Mike arrived by plane, after just a day’s
notice with a full set of gear? He had taken their private jet.

People ride across the country for a variety of reasons. For some, it’s a way
to get in shape or get some exercise. Some do it for a cause, asking friends
and family to donate or spreading awareness as they go. Some do it
competitively and race across as quickly as they can. I learn why the other
three were riding as we go, hearing details here and there that I piece
together over time. Hannah had just quit her job as a nurse and is about to
start veterinary school. Given that she had time after quitting, it made sense
that she would want to join her friend on the ride. Mike was having some issues
with his job and his relationship with his girlfriend because of alcohol, and
so going on the trip gave him an easier environment to be in, in order to stay
sober. Jen was also riding to get away, after getting drunk at a party and
cheating on her boyfriend of five years. This isn’t something she told me
directly, but after a few weeks, I started to understand. Sometimes I see her
tearing up while riding, which is so unlike her, and quickly battle them away.
I wondered if I needed a justification to be riding, more than just for fun,
but just for fun was enough for me.

For the most part, we all get along fairly well. We eat together, sleep
together, swim together when we can, and it seems as if I’ve known all of them
for years. Other days, not so much. Usually, I bike up the hills and wait at
the top for the other three. It’s simpler for me, and they usually don’t like
when they feel like they’re slowing me down. On a gray day, I make it to the
top of a long climb, and find a spot to sit in a parking lot. They are probably
about 20 minutes behind, I figure, so I pull out my phone. I don’t have any
service, which isn’t a big surprise when it’s so hilly. I look out over the
horizon, and notice the clouds. I know it’s supposed to rain today, I just
don’t know when. Twenty minutes pass, and still no sign of the others. They’re
probably just taking a break on their way up. It starts to get windy, and I can
feel the air get moist, hinting at the rain to come. All of a sudden I see a
flash, and I know that on the top of a hill, exposed in a parking lot, is not
at all the place I want to be. I know I should wait for the others, but not up
here. I’m starting to worry about where they are, and I feel bad continuing on,
but I don’t want to get drenched. A few minutes down the hill I find an
abandoned gas station with an overhang enough for me to stand under, and I
quickly pull myself out of the rain under the cover. 

It’s quite windy now and sheets of rain are riddling the pavement in front of
me, making a stream on the side of the road. The other three must also be
waiting out the storm, just over the other side of the hill. Finally, as the
downpour starts to subside, I see them in their rain gear, coming slowly down
the hill, brakes squealing. I’m happy to see them, until I notice their stern
faces, and I realize something is wrong. Jen tells me that she had a flat tire,
and they were stuck on the other side of the hill trying to fix it. She asks
why I went so far, and didn’t come back after they didn’t follow. Her
frustration baffles me. How could she be mad at me for that? It was a storm, so
obviously I didn’t want to be on the top of a hill throughout all of it, or
riding backwards in the route. Does she not understand that? Are they all mad
at me, or is it just her? How long are they going to be mad at me? Am I going
to unwittingly fall into their anger again? 

As the thoughts and emotions swirl in my mind, I realize I am stuck with these
three people who are all mad at me for the next six weeks until we reach the
coast. To my surprise, however, it only takes a day or so for the emotions to
start to settle. There is no big conversation or apology, it is just the power
of having bigger things to deal with. The fear of us falling apart again,
however, looms large in my mind.

![Kansas](images/kansas_flat.jpg)

Kansas is a very flat state. Some people say it’s “flat as a pancake”, but I
like to think of it more as a waffle. The roads are all formed in a grid, some
going North-South and others going East-West. There just isn’t any reason for a
road to wind, because it has nothing to wind around. The US has a natural
feature where the wind generally likes to travel from West to East, so we’ve
often been biking into the wind. The barren flats of Kansas have few variables
other than wind speed and direction breaking the monotony of traveling through
the state.

One night, we stay in the small town of Hudson, Kansas. It isn’t much of a
town, but there are a number of houses and a small factory, ominously quiet. As
we ride past it, I notice a yellow sort of gravel, which I then realize is
corn. We pull up to the community center, where we are welcomed in and bring
our bikes over to a corner where we can put out our mats and sleep. Our host is
extremely nice and friendly, and tells us that we can stay a couple nights if
we want to. Apparently, the wind tomorrow is going to be much stronger than
usual, and going the wrong direction for us. I take a look at my forecast to
corroborate, and sure enough, it will be gusting over 40 mph. The community
will be having bingo during the day and then a burger night following that, and
we are welcome to join in. I know that there’s no chance we’re going to make
any progress the next day given the headwind, so I look over at Jen to see what
she thinks. Before I can say anything, she declines the offer, insisting we
need to keep going. Later that night, I try to suggest that we stay, but she
reiterates that we’ll be fine, just be slower than usual. I’m skeptical, yet
defeated. 

We head out the next day, and sure enough, the wind is as promised. Right off
the bat, our pace crawls to basically a stop. It looks like Mike and Hannah are
not doing well, and Jen is losing faith in our ability to make it. We just have
to make it to the first turn, and then we’ll be out of the headwind. I look at
my watch; two hours since we left. My map shows that we’ve only gone a fraction
of the distance to the turn. I don’t even want to calculate the speed we’re
going, because it is so pitiful. Showing this to Jen and the others, we
concede, and fly back to Hudson in nearly a half an hour. I go 15 mph without
pushing the pedals! And best of all, we make it back in time for bingo. 

As we make our way from Kansas to Colorado, we have gotten into the habit of
riding the morning together, stopping for lunch, and then I continue on to our
stopping point, meeting them at the end of the day. We had all agreed to this
as it gave us some time apart, which was important when we were spending
basically all of our time together. 

This day is no different, and I leave after lunch, going just a little faster
than them. There’s a strong headwind, and lots of big trucks on the road that
make biking difficult. I make it to the AirBnB and lay back into the recliner
in front of the TV, figuring that it’ll be a couple hours before the others
arrive. I send a text to check in with them, and they say that they have
hitchhiked to get a car in the nearest town. Wow, that’s odd, I guess that road
was pretty bad. I hope they’re okay. An hour later, I get another: “We also
adopted a dog”. I’m not sure what to make of this. Jen had mentioned wanting to
adopt a dog after the trip ended, so maybe this was some sort of joke?

Sure enough, they show up in a uHaul and a dog jumps out with the three of
them. I’m a mix of amazed, confused, even a little frustrated. Where is the dog
going to go? Why do they have a uHaul? Why do they make all of these decisions
without telling me?

After a little bit of confusion, they answer all of my questions. Mike and
Hannah have given up on biking, and Mike is going to fly home in a few days.
Jen is going to join the twins in the van for the first few days as well, so
she can get to know her new dog. Hannah is going to exchange the uHaul for a
camper van for the rest of the trip, and is going to drive behind Jen and me,
and will carry Jen’s gear. This means I am on my own for the next few days. I
feel blindsided by the way the very core of our trip has altered. I knew they
were not prepared from the beginning, but I always thought that meant they were
going to be slower than me, and I would never have to worry about them leaving
me. To be fair, they aren’t completely leaving. Jen is still biking, but will I
be able to keep up with her if she’s not carrying anything? I have carried my
gear the whole way so far, and I don’t want to put my gear in the car because I
don’t want to rely on them. Part of the trip for me is the idea that I’m
carrying all that I need on my bike, and it would be cheating for me to have my
gear carried. Strangely, the idea of riding on my own for a few days is
actually a bit exciting. I could ride my own pace, my own distance, and not
have to worry about the others. After all, I had been doing exactly that for
parts of the past many days.

![Broken Valve](images/broken_valve.jpg)

Before it’s light out, my first day starting on my own, I end up with a flat.
Not a normal flat, where the tube blows a hole or a leak somewhere, but the
entire valve from my tube pops off. This kind of flat is not patchable, so I
have to throw out my tube. I fix this under the shallow dawn light, a cool
breeze fighting my chilled fingers as they work the new tube back into place. 

Then, I run into a second flat, this time in front of a bowling alley. I stop
in to fix the tube in their lobby, and to get a little break from the chilly
fall weather outside. Apparently, there’s an early cold front coming through,
bringing lower temperatures than they’re used to, and it looks like it’s
getting worse in the next few days. 

We get a little one-day break from the cold, and I strip down to just my shorts
and my jersey. Jen’s biking with me now, and we’re doing well. The night before
Pueblo, we camp out in a tiny town in a little dirt patch that is the town
common. The wind is predicted to pick up overnight, and be pretty rough. Jen
and Hannah are in their van. Apparently there is just enough space for two, and
so I’m going to have to stay outside. It’s what I’d planned on doing anyway,
but I can’t help feeling a bit angry at them for ditching me. I’m a little
worried, too. What if the temperature drops below what my gear can handle?

The wind breaks through my worried thought spiral and rips at my tent, making a
ruckus and threatening to roll me over inside of it. I look at the tent poles,
bowing against the fly which is whipping back and forth violently. I’m too
tired to try to deal with anything, and fall asleep. 

The next day is cold again, and we head into Pueblo. Pueblo is one of the few
larger towns on our route, so I’m excited to see a place that might feel
somewhat like home. For the first time on the trip, it’s snowing, and I’m
really feeling the effects of the weather. I stop at a gas station, and buy
some of those little fried hot dog rolls, just to see if those will warm me up. 

Apparently, the cold hasn’t gotten to Jen, and she’s asking me if I’m ready to
leave. I’m not, but we’re so close to Pueblo, and I don’t want to be a burden,
so we head back out into the cold and continue on. It’s only a 40 mile ride,
and we make it. Sitting in a cafe, we discuss our next move. 

I’m really worried about the weather now, and I don’t know what we should do. I
want to stay put and wait out the cold front, but the other two are still on a
tight deadline. I suggest going south, but they don’t want to end up traveling
up the coast for their flight. They suggest driving to the other side of the
cold front. I’ve made it all this way without car support, and I feel like
that’s a big part of my trip. When I started, I told myself that I would do it
fully unsupported, and I kept that promise to myself, even when offered a ride
for short segments back to the route when we had a rental car. After much
deliberation, we decide to give into the weather, and we decide to drive out a
few hundred miles west into the mountains. 

![Broken Valve](images/broken_valve.jpg)

The camper van is a bit of an eye sore. It’s a rental, painted in the most
hippie colorful glitzy scheme, and to top it off, we load our bikes onto the
roof. I’m relieved as we leave the city, escaping the thick barrage of eyes
upon us. I haven’t traveled in a car for a month, and after seeing peaks
approach over hours, watching them swing by in mere minutes is a welcome break.
The shame gives way to relief as the first chapter of my trip comes to close. I
force myself to package up the first half of the trip, seal it, and put it
behind me. It was the adventure that counted, anyway. As we fly up the long
ascent into the mountains, the world outside looks forbiddingly cold and windy.
We seem to be on a constant slope up into the sky. 

We drive over the border into Utah, and although there is still a bit of snow
on the ground, the weather is predicted to improve. We drive into an RV
campground that has some extra spots, and park to spend the night. It’s chilly
outside, and I’m scared. I’m scared because I don’t know if I’ll be able to
handle the weather, and if it will actually improve the way we hope it will.
I’m scared because I don’t know if I’ll be able to ask Jen and Hannah if I can
use the van if it gets too cold. I’m scared of the elevation that we’re at, as
I’ve never biked at a high elevation before, and I don’t know what it’s going
to be like. I’m scared because I’ve been away from home longer than ever
before. 

I make my way to the campground bathroom to wash up. I look at myself in the
mirror, and all of a sudden, burst into tears. I decide I don’t have to leave
the bathroom tonight, I can just camp here. It’s safe and warm in here. It was
one of the nicer campground bathrooms I’d seen, after all. I call my mom to
check in. Before I get a few words in, I’m back into tears. My mom consoles me,
in the way that only a mother can, reassures me that I’ll be okay, and finally
walks me through my options. There is one that I can tell she thinks is right
and I think is impossible, and that is to leave the other two, and ride the
warmer southern route on my own. I had thought about it a few times myself, but
the issue was, if I asked to go on my own, and they said no it would cause bad
feelings between us for the rest of the trip. I just couldn’t take the risk.
Finally, I pull myself together, pack up my things, and go back outside to the
van. They are in the back, now folded out into a bed, and I hop into the front
seat to chat with them. It’s pretty chilly out, so I get up the courage to ask
if I can stay in the front seat tonight. We start talking about plans for the
coming days, and for the third time that evening, I burst into tears again.
They try to calm me down, and when I am finally able to use words again, I
explain to them my worries. Finally, Jen asks if I want to leave them and go
off on my own.

I don’t answer immediately. I have no idea what to do. Will I survive on my
own? Was that more or less scary than traveling with them? Was it crazy? I
didn’t have a route planned out, and I am only 18 years old. I guess I can just
head south until it’s warm, and then continue West to the coast?

Because we had driven through half of Colorado, we were now ahead of schedule,
so we spend the day touring Moab. This gives me some time to make my decision,
and by midday the idea of striking out on my own is growing on me. It doesn’t
eliminate the fears I have, but I decide that I can do it. After all, I had
made it halfway with the three of them, but I was physically able to carry all
of my things and was involved in most of the decisions. I find a fellow cyclist
host to stay with for my first night, and say goodbye to Jen and Hannah.

![Broken Valve](images/broken_valve.jpg)

My hosts are a couple about the age of my parents, and they are absolutely
wonderful stand-ins for them that first night. After a delicious dinner, they
show me maps of the area. The husband likes to ride in the same direction I
will be going, so he has some tips on where to go and what to watch out for. As
I head out the next morning, the weather is still cold, but the knowledge that
I’m riding towards warmer weather helps. At first, it’s a little scary, but
that feeling doesn’t last long. All of a sudden, I travel over a pass and it
opens up to a huge canyon, with rocks colored like I’ve never seen before, and
I’m absolutely stunned. There is no one else in sight, and I find myself
uncontrollably grinning at the beauty that I’ve encountered. 

I find a ranger’s station on the side of the road. There’s a porta-potty, a
couple cars, and a motorcycle parked outside a small concrete building. I go
inside to ask about where I can camp for the night. The ranger tells me that
anywhere off the side of the road and out of sight will be fine. A gruff man,
looking to be the owner of the motorcycle, looks over and says, “welcome to the
Wild West!”. 

While our journey did start in Davis Square, my journey begins as I, fresh and
emboldened, ride out alone into the desert.

![Canyon View](images/canyon_view.jpg)
